So the next category of data we discuss
has the form of graphs or networks,
the most obvious example
being social networks.
Now speaking of social networks,
Tim Libzek created a social network
from the Lord of the Rings Trilogy.
This graph represents
the characters' allegiances,
that is who is faithful
to whom in the books.
So the nodes are characters and
other entities, like cities, and
the edges connecting pairs of
nodes represent allegiances.
So after this video, you'll be able to
identify graph data in practical problems
and describe path, neighborhood, and
connectivity operations in graphs.
But this specialization includes
a separate course in graph analytics
that provides a much more detailed
treatment on the subject.
Now what distinguishes a graph
from other data models
is that it bears two kinds of information.
One, properties and attributes of
entities and relationships, and
two, the connectivity structure that
constitutes the network itself.
One way to look at this data
is shown in the figure,
borrowed from the Apache Spark system.
In this representation,
the graph on the left is represented
by two tables on the right.
The vertex, or node table, gives IDs
to nodes and lists their properties.
The edge table has two parts.
The colored part represents
the properties of the edge,
whereas the white part contains just the
direction of the arrows in the network.
Thus, since there is a directed
edge going from node 3 to node 7,
there is a tupple 3,
7 in that part of the edge table.
Now this form of the graph model is
called the property graph model,
which we'll see many times in this
course and in the specialization.
Now representing connectivity information
gives graph data a new kind of
computing ability that's different from
other data models we have seen so far.
Even without looking at the properties
of the nodes and edges, one can get very
interesting information just by analyzing
or querying this connectivity structure.
Consider a social network with three
types of nodes, user, city, and
restaurant, and three types of edges,
friend, likes, and lives in.
The leftmost node, AG, represents me.
And I'm interested in finding a good
Italian restaurant in New York
that my friends, or their friends,
who also live in New York, like.
I shall possibly choose IT3 because
it has the highest number of
like edges coming into it from people
who have a lives in edge to New York.
And at the same time,
can be reached by following
the friend edges going out from me.
Now this shows a very important class
of operations and ground data, namely
traversal, that involves edge following
based on some sort of conditions.
A number of path operations
required some sort of optimization.
The simplest among these is the well known
shortest path query, which is applied to
node networks to find the best route from
a source location to a target location.
The second class of optimization
operations is required to find
an optimal path that must include
some user specified nodes, for
the operation has to determine the order
in which the nodes once we visited.
The classical application
is a trip planner,
where the user specifies the cities
she wishes to visit, and
the operation will optimize the criterion,
like the total distance covered.
The third category is a case where
the system must find the best possible
path in the network, given two or
more optimization criteria,
which cannot be satisfied simultaneously.
For example, if I want to travel
from my house to the airport
using the shortest distance, but also
minimizing the amount of highway travel,
the algorithm must find a best compromise.
This is called a pareto-optimality
problem on graphs.
The neighborhood of a node N in a graph is
a set of edges directly connected to it.
A K neighborhood of N is a collection
of edges between nodes that are,
at most, K steps away from N.
So going back to our mini social
network graph, Bob, Jill,
and Sarah are the first neighbors of AG,
while Max, Tim and
Pam belong to the second neighborhood and
not the first neighborhood of AG.
Finally, Jen is a third level neighbor.
An important class of analysis to perform
with neighborhoods is community finding.
A community and a social network can
be a very close group of friends.
So the graph shown in this
figure has four communities.
One can see in the figure that each
community has a higher density of edges
within the community and a lower density
across two different communities.
Finding densely connected parts of a graph
helps identify neighborhoods that
can be recognized as communities.
A more complex class of operations include
finding the best possible clusters,
which is another name for
communities in a graph, so
that any other grouping of nodes into
communities will be less effective.
Now, as graphs become bigger and denser,
these methods become harder to compute.
Thus, neighborhood-based
optimization operation present
significant scalability challenges.
If we inspect the neighborhood of
every node in a graph, sometimes,
we'll find neighborhoods that
are different from all others.
These neighborhoods are called anomalous.
Consider the following four graphs and
on the central red node.
The first graph is odd because
it's almost perfectly star shaped.
That is, the nodes that the red node
is connected to are almost unconnected
amongst themselves.
That's really odd because it
doesn't happen in reality much.
So it's an anomalous node.
The second figure shows
a neighborhood to which
a significantly large number of neighbors
has connected amongst themselves.
This makes the graph very cliquish,
where a clique refers to a neighborhood
where each node is connected to all other
neighborhood nodes in the neighborhood.
The third figure shows a neighborhood,
where some edges have an unusually
heavy weight compared to the others.
The fourth figure shows
a special case of the third,
where one edge is predominantly high
rate compared to all the other edges.
Connectedness is a fundamental
property of a graph.
In a connected graph,
each node is reachable from every
other node through some path.
If a graph is not connected, but there
are subgraphs of it, which are connected,
then these subgraphs are called connected
components of the original graph.
In the figure on the right,
there are four connected components.
A search gradient like
finding optimal paths
should be performed only within
each component and not across them.
For large graphs, there are several
new parallelized techniques for
the detection of connected components.
We will discuss a map
reduce based technique for
connected components in a later course.